src/data-visualisation/colour/primary-colours.md, before:

---
layout: article
title: "Primary Colours"
description: "Overview of the main colours that should be used at the NHSBSA"
status: DRAFT
tags: [data-viz, data-viz-colour]
order: 2
---
## Primary colours  

See the [NHS Identity Guidelines Colours pages][pc 1] for more detail. 

### Background  
  
Use a plain background, NHS Grey 5 (#f0f4f5) should be used.  
NHS White (#ffffff) is used to make important information stand out and for alternating backgrounds, for example on the NHS website home page.  

![Horizontal rectangular block of the colour NHS White with the name 'NHS White' as well as the CMYK, RGB and Hex codes for the colour all written below in black text on a white background](../images/nhs-white.png)
   
::: details Source
 
[NHS digital service manual; Colour][pc 2]
:::   
  

### Single variables  
NHS Blue (#005EB8) is the primary colour to be used across our products.  
  
![Horizontal rectangular block of the colour NHS Blue with the name 'NHS Blue' as well as the Pantone, CMYK, RGB, Hex, and RAL codes for the colour all written below in black text on a white background](../images/nhs-blue.png)
 


### Two variables  
NHS Blue (#005EB8) alongside NHS Light Blue (#41B6E6) is recommended for two variables.  
  
![Horizontal rectangular block of the colour NHS Blue with the name 'NHS Blue' as well as the Pantone, CMYK, RGB, Hex, and RAL codes for the colour all written below in black text on a white background](../images/nhs-blue.png)      ![Horizontal rectangular block of the colour NHS Light Blue with the name 'NHS Light Blue' as well as the Pantone, CMYK, RGB, and Hex codes for the colour all written below in black text on a white background](../images/nhs-light-blue.png)
 
  

### Related variables  
NHS Blue (#005EB8) alongside NHS Light Blue (#41B6E6) is recommended for two variables. For related variables such as comparing adults and children across two groupings, a 50% tint if recommended. Meaning for each grouping, the colour will be consistent, with two tints.  

If you need to use tints of this palette and have a small number of tints needed, use either 25% or 50%. We recommend 50%. If tints do not pass contrast ratio checks and the visualisation is suitable (i.e. not a line graph), a border should be created to further enhance the colour.  

Otherwise, tints of 80%, 60%, 40% and 20% can be used. Any % value is accepted as long as it is visible, clear and accessible.  

Note: we only recommend outlining the bars when using tints of a palette, in general, bar outlines add unnecessary clutter. We outline all bars to maintain consistency.  

::: details Source
 
[GOV.UK Design System; Colour][pc 3]  
[Sequential data colour palette][pc 4]  
[NHS identity guidelines; Using tints][pc 5]
:::  

For an indication of colour schemes and combinations using binary, qualitative, diverging and sequential data the diagram below is useful:  

![Diagram showing the relationships between different colours and different groups of colours, with the labels 'binary', 'qualitative', 'diverging', and 'sequential' to indicate when each colour scheme is most appropriate](../images/scheme.png)  

  
::: details Source
 
[Colour use guidelines for mapping and visualization][pc 6]
:::   


[Back to Colour](../)  
  
  



[pc 1]: https://service-manual.nhs.uk/design-system/styles/colour
[pc 2]: https://service-manual.nhs.uk/design-system/styles/colour
[pc 3]: https://design-system.service.gov.uk/styles/colour/
[pc 4]: https://analysisfunction.civilservice.gov.uk/policy-store/data-visualisation-colours-in-charts/#section-6
[pc 5]: https://www.england.nhs.uk/nhsidentity/identity-guidelines/colours/#:~:text=use%20of%20highlights.-,Using%20tints,-Tints%20are%20percentage
[pc 6]: https://web.natur.cuni.cz/~langhamr/lectures/vtfg1/mapinfo_2/barvy/colors.html

Commit message:

added hex code colour blocks

src/data-visualisation/colour/primary-colours.md, after:

---
layout: article
title: "Primary Colours"
description: "Overview of the main colours that should be used at the NHSBSA"
status: DRAFT
tags: [data-viz, data-viz-colour]
order: 2
---
## Primary colours  

See the [NHS Identity Guidelines Colours pages][pc 1] for more detail. 

### Background  
  
Use a plain background, NHS Grey 5 (#f0f4f5) should be used.  

![Rectangle of block colour in the shade #f0f4f5 NHS Grey 5, light grayish cyan](../images/hex-f0f4f5.png)  
  
NHS White (#ffffff) is used to make important information stand out and for alternating backgrounds, for example on the NHS website home page.  

![Horizontal rectangular block of the colour NHS White with the name 'NHS White' as well as the CMYK, RGB and Hex codes for the colour all written below in black text on a white background](../images/nhs-white.png)
   
::: details Source
 
[NHS digital service manual; Colour][pc 2]
:::   
  

### Single variables  
NHS Blue (#005EB8) is the primary colour to be used across our products.  
  
![Horizontal rectangular block of the colour NHS Blue with the name 'NHS Blue' as well as the Pantone, CMYK, RGB, Hex, and RAL codes for the colour all written below in black text on a white background](../images/nhs-blue.png)
 


### Two variables  
NHS Blue (#005EB8) alongside NHS Light Blue (#41B6E6) is recommended for two variables.  
  
![Horizontal rectangular block of the colour NHS Blue with the name 'NHS Blue' as well as the Pantone, CMYK, RGB, Hex, and RAL codes for the colour all written below in black text on a white background](../images/nhs-blue.png)      ![Horizontal rectangular block of the colour NHS Light Blue with the name 'NHS Light Blue' as well as the Pantone, CMYK, RGB, and Hex codes for the colour all written below in black text on a white background](../images/nhs-light-blue.png)
 
  

### Related variables  
NHS Blue (#005EB8) alongside NHS Light Blue (#41B6E6) is recommended for two variables. For related variables such as comparing adults and children across two groupings, a 50% tint if recommended. Meaning for each grouping, the colour will be consistent, with two tints.  

If you need to use tints of this palette and have a small number of tints needed, use either 25% or 50%. We recommend 50%. If tints do not pass contrast ratio checks and the visualisation is suitable (i.e. not a line graph), a border should be created to further enhance the colour.  

Otherwise, tints of 80%, 60%, 40% and 20% can be used. Any % value is accepted as long as it is visible, clear and accessible.  

Note: we only recommend outlining the bars when using tints of a palette, in general, bar outlines add unnecessary clutter. We outline all bars to maintain consistency.  

::: details Source
 
[GOV.UK Design System; Colour][pc 3]  
[Sequential data colour palette][pc 4]  
[NHS identity guidelines; Using tints][pc 5]
:::  

For an indication of colour schemes and combinations using binary, qualitative, diverging and sequential data the diagram below is useful:  

![Diagram showing the relationships between different colours and different groups of colours, with the labels 'binary', 'qualitative', 'diverging', and 'sequential' to indicate when each colour scheme is most appropriate](../images/scheme.png)  

  
::: details Source
 
[Colour use guidelines for mapping and visualization][pc 6]
:::   


[Back to Colour](../)  
  
  



[pc 1]: https://service-manual.nhs.uk/design-system/styles/colour
[pc 2]: https://service-manual.nhs.uk/design-system/styles/colour
[pc 3]: https://design-system.service.gov.uk/styles/colour/
[pc 4]: https://analysisfunction.civilservice.gov.uk/policy-store/data-visualisation-colours-in-charts/#section-6
[pc 5]: https://www.england.nhs.uk/nhsidentity/identity-guidelines/colours/#:~:text=use%20of%20highlights.-,Using%20tints,-Tints%20are%20percentage
[pc 6]: https://web.natur.cuni.cz/~langhamr/lectures/vtfg1/mapinfo_2/barvy/colors.html
